---
layout: post
title: "BMO 2014 Problem 3"
date: 2022-02-12
categories: python
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

### Twenty Rooms
This problem is from the [British Mathematical Olympiad](https://www.ukmt.org.uk/bmo1). It is Problem 3 of the [2014 Round 1](https://bmos.ukmt.org.uk/home/bmo1-2015.pdf) paper.
The problem states: 

> A hotel has ten rooms along each side of a corridor. An olympiad team leader 
> wishes to book seven rooms on the corridor so that no two reserved rooms on 
> the same side of the corridor are adjacent. In how many ways can this be done?
<!--more-->


### Python
A simple approach is to look through all possible combinations of 7 rooms that could be chosen.
Start by defining an array to represent the state of the corridor at any moment.

```python
x = [0 for i in range(20)]
```

Let 0 represent a room that is not chosen. 1 represents a room that is chosen. We ignore the 2 sides of the corridor for now because it makes little difference.
Then look through each combination of 7 rooms out of 20.

```python
combinations = []
total = 0

def combination(current_state, length, free_space):
    global total
    if length == 7:
        total += 1
        
        valid = True
        for i in range(9):
            if current_state[i] == current_state[i + 1] == 1:
                valid = False
        for i in range(10, 19):
            if current_state[i] == current_state[i+1] == 1:
                valid = False
        
        if valid:
            combinations.append(current_state.copy())
        return
    else:
        for i in range(free_space, 20):
            current_state[i] = 1
            combination(current_state, length + 1, i +   1)
            current_state[i] = 0
```

The `total` variable will allow us to check if the combination function has looked through every single combination.
The `length` paramters tells the function how many rooms have been chosen, and the `free_space` variable tells the function where to look for the next room that is available to be chosen.
Every time the function reaches 7 chosen rooms, it checks if the rooms from 0-9 (side 1), and the rooms from 10-19 (side 2) are adjacent.
If the combination is valid, it adds the combination to the array `combinations`.
Now execute:

```python
permute(x, 0, 0)

print(len(combinations))
print(total)
```

Pass the arguments `x` (current state), 0 (since no rooms are chosen yet), and 0 (first available room is the room at index 0).
`len(combinations)` correctly returns the output 4352, the answer to the problem.
`total` is the total number of 7 room combinations the function checked through, and returns 77520.
This is the number we expect, because 20 Choose 7 (20!/(7!*13!))) = 77520.
